---
author: "Aaron Schlesinger"
date: 2020-11-19T14:26:41-08:00
title: 'KEDA and KEDA-HTTP for Webapps'
slug: 'k8s-webapps-easy-button'

# For twitter cards, see https://github.com/mtn/cocoa-eh-hugo-theme/wiki/Twitter-cards
# meta_img = "/images/image.jpg"

# For hacker news and lobsters builtin links, see github.com/mtn/cocoa-eh-hugo-theme/wiki/Social-Links
# hacker_news_id = ""
# lobsters_id = ""
---

When you search for ["what is Kubernetes?"](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=what+is+kubernetes&t=brave&ia=web), content abounds with details of the system. There's less about, generally, what Kubernetes is at the highest level. Here's my attempt in two sentences:

>Kubernetes is an operating system for your cluster of computers. Like any OS, you get a syscall API and build abstractions from there.

If you're new to Kubernetes, take the time to let those two sentences sink in before you move on to technical details, especially if your goal is to run your applications on Kubernetes. Much of the content and state of the art in the community is oriented toward people trying to _operate Kubernetes clusters_.

## A Day in the Life of a Webapp Developer

I'm using the term "webapp developer" in a very imprecise way; that's on purpose. I'm not out to define what this group "webapp developers" does, I'm out to assert the tasks they _shouldn't have to do_ while building their app. We're all webapp developers or we need to understand they need if we work in the Kubernetes world. First and foremost, developers need higher-level abstractions than the syscall API.

Kubernetes is a robust platform for web applications, not an adequate user experience for web developers. Many people in the Kubernetes community refer to Kubernetes as a "platform platform." That adage is roughly equivalent.

## A Better UX

We don't have a state of the art developer focused user experienced (UX) for deploying production apps to Kubernetes, so we need to look elsewhere. Many cloud providers have great UX-es, which we should bring into our community:

- You focus on running your code, not underlying resources like VMs or containers
- Your code scales up and down based on demand
- A CLI is available to deploy your code to production with a command
  - Your app is optionally built in the cloud
- It's easy to connect your code to other databases and other cloud services
- You can opt in to advanced features like gradual rollouts and more

Kubernetes has the foundational technologies that can build these higher level features. Our challenge is to choose the right ones and assemble them in a friendly way.

## KEDA HTTP

That brings us to [KEDA-HTTP](https://github.com/osscda/kedahttp), a new project I'm starting. I'm building KEDA-HTTP to bring Kubernetes closer "webapp developers" by abstracting over the syscalls and exposing the right features for developers.

Under the hood, the project assembles several foundational technologies to build the right UX:

- Standard Kubernetes `Deployment`s, `Service`s and `Ingress`es and Ingress Controllers for running pods ("compute") and routing HTTP traffic to them
- [KEDA](https://keda.sh) for scaling `Deployment`s up and down
- The [operator pattern](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/) and [Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) for defining a comprehensive abstraction and API over KEDA and the standard Kubernetes resources

