---
layout: post
title: Epilepsy 2
summary: After I returned from Chicago, I found all the changes I had to make to my life
---

## A Note
I began writing my last post about Epilepsy because I felt good to express my experience and feelings via this medium. My first draft was a novel, but I felt relieved because everything was out on the screen. As I edited the text and made it more concise, my thoughts and memories became more clear somehow. I'm glad I found this outlet.

When I shared the post publicly and posted on Facebook, I saw the outpouring of support and was humbled. From the bottom of my heart, thank you to everyone who read that post. It means the world to me, more than I can describe in text.

Even given the positives that I've experienced from writing, I've been conflicted about continuing to write. I have a predisposition toward isolating my feelings. Sharing makes me uncomfortable. How ironic that, by saying that, I've just shared my feelings.

The following text describes what happened in the weeks after I returned from Chicago, back to the "real world" that I had waiting in San Francisco.

## Coming back to SF
By the time I was ready to come back to San Francisco, most of the primal feelings of fear toward seizure activity were gone. I had a list of rules to keep physically healthy. If I followed them I was confident that I could live normally:

1. Avoid anxiety, it is the biggest trigger for my seizure activity. This is by far the most important rule.
2. Do not drink alcohol, it can have negative interactions with the medication I'm taking.
3. Avoid sleep deprivation and keep a regular sleep schedule
4. Take medicine on a regular schedule (9am and 9pm).
5. Keep blood sugar stable, insulin spikes can lead to my seizure activity.
6. Stay hydrated, dehydration can cause seizures.
7. Always carry my rescue drug with me.

I remember thinking that these rules were gonna end my life. Then I was ashamed of myself that I wasn't strong enough to find a way to make something work. I don't think it was suicidal because I didn't want to harm myself. I felt like the harm was already done. I was anxious about my future, depressed, resentful, isolated, angry, etc...

I hid all of these feelings from almost everyone, and I made things worse for myself for so many reasons. In fact, some of my friends had no idea anything major was going on until they read my previous post. I talked with my parents regularly, then started talking with my sister. They all provided support which eventually led me to be more open about everything that's going on. At some point, I was able to open up to my psychologist and make progress with her.

## Digging out

I began to dig out of the mess I was in. My parents, sister and psychologist helped immensely, and many of my friends and coworkers helped without even knowing. If any of you guys are reading, thank you. Seriously, thank you.

I got to a place where I could think about making a healthy, sustainable life. I joined a few running groups and began to run longer distances. I enjoyed my soccer groups and played with a new passion that I feel like I didn't have before.

And most importantly, I began to work with everyone I could to reduce my anxiety. I feel proud that I was able to get to a place where I could work without burning myself out, be in social situations and not wonder what others think of me, and even speak about my feelings openly. I also was able to identify when I was getting more anxious

I'm going to write more on what I tried and try to do to break some of these lifelong habits.

## Drugs

I was doing well, but drugs started to interfere. After a few days of minor aura activity, I told my doctor that my anxiety was a bit higher and I began taking a higher dose of my anti anxiety medicine, Celexa. And I had a bad reaction.

The worst part was the depression. It was worse even than what I was feeling before. The worst I've ever felt, and pretty much rock bottom in retrospect. There's a scientific explanation to explain what was happening, but I didn't want to hear it. I had a horrible outlook on the world, I had to drag myself out of bed in the morning, out the door to do chores, or into the car to go to work. I felt once again like my life was in jeopardy of going bad.

So, with the help of my doctor, I began to wean off of the drug. As I did, I experienced a withdrawal. The depression remained, I had some increased anxiety, migraines, and some other side effects.

And I developed a pretty strong anger and indifference toward everything in my life. I simultaneously like I had a terrible deal in life, and that I should be happy because there are people out there starving or suffering from way worse afflictions.

## Taking control

At my Dad's suggestion I went to see a psychiatrist and he seemed to have good experience, including with epileptics. We talked for a while about what's going on, how I'm feeling, etc... He even offered to prescribe other drugs to help combat the withdrawal effects I was experiencing. I remember that sounding like an endless road to hell to me.

I told him in clear, objective terms how I was feeling and that I was heavily biased against taking any more mood-altering drugs. I had been isolating my feelings for a while at that point, and I felt great after opening up like that, asserting myself, and coming to an understanding with the doctor as well.

I asserted myself like that, I felt more in control. I built on that feeling of control and hours later, that same day, I felt better than I had in weeks.





