---
layout: post
title: Anxiety
summary: After being diagnosed with Epilepsy, I realized that Anxiety is a big trigger for my seizures.
---

I felt good writing my last post because I've had a tendency to isolate myself from the world, and it felt good to break down the wall. So here I am writing another one.

After I saw the support that my friends and family showed me when they saw the post, I was humbled. Thank you to everyone who read my previous post, and thank you in advance to those who read this one. I hope you know that it means the world to me.

When I realized that anxiety was a big trigger for seizures, I began to look for causes of my anxiety. I was never good at admitting that something's wrong with me, but I got some good practice all those times I was lying in an E.R. bed. Regardless, it took a while to build the confidence to be brutally honest with myself. Once I did, though, these habits cane out pretty quickly:

1. I, like many others, am anxious about things that I can't control. To combat that anxiety, I was trying to control everything I could.
2. I put a lot of pressure on myself to be the best...
3. I was assuming the worst case scenario a lot
4. I have a great ability to chain the assumptions in #3 together
5. I combine #3 and #4 to imagine absolute worst-case scenario situations. I can name 10 examples right now, and they all would produce a huge amount of anxiety out of thin air

There's a tragically ironic situation in that firs tone. I want to take on as much responsibility as I can because I want to decrease my anxiety. Once I pile on more responsibility, I have more anxiety, and when that happens I go back to the beginning. It's a vicious cycle and I had to work pretty hard to break it. Also a side effect of that item is that I isolated myself from others by taking on their problems. Lame.

Now let's move to the second item. Lots of us put some pressure on ourselves to be the best, that's called ambition. But increase the pressure on anyone and they start to get distracted from their work. Try it anywhere - you put pressure on someone and they're more likely to fuck something up. It goes the other way too - if you distract someone, they'll usually try to focus to get it done. There's an evolutionary explanation to both of these examples, but I'm not gonna talk about that here.

My problem begins when I get distracted by the pressure I put on myself. I also tend to have a schedule in the back of my head so I can remember when things need to be done. Then when I get distracted, I get more anxious that things won't get done on time. And then I increase the pressure to perform. Another vicious cycle.

So look at these first two items - they both describe these somewhat elaborate "vicious cycles." The rest of the items on the list cause these same cycles as well.

When we identified this list, we began to make some progress. I identified that these are habits, and they affect pretty much my whole life - work, friends, romance, hobbies, etc... I sometimes even made mundane things like catching a flight insanely complicated and horrible because of these habits. It was pretty clear that I just needed to chill the fuck out.

There's no arm patch or rehab center to eliminate this kind of habit, but there is therapy. Luckily, my dad is a cognitive psychologist. I also worked with some other amazing professional psychologists, and some "unlicensed" ones such as my mom (lawyer) and sister (business school student). I feel like this group of people saved my life, and I'll never stop reminding and thanking them for that.

So I began by looking at the parts of my life that caused me so much stress. Conveniently it's really clear how these habits manifest themselves at work, so that was the first target. I was surprised how easy I found it to stop myself from doing a habit at work. I see it, and then I just don't do it. I've heard lots of people say "the first step is admitting you have a problem" on TV, etc..., and now I know what that actually means. The hard part is realizing what's going on. You do that first and everything else flows pretty naturally.